# Investigating the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on How Americans Spend Their Time
View output from .ipynb file here: https://nbviewer.org/github/jennabedrava/ATUS_visualizations/blob/master/ATUS_project.ipynb

The introduction of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in early 2020 and the ensuing COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the global population multilaterally. The global lockdown initiated to mitigate the spread of the ravaging SARS-CoV-2 virus was the first of the century, leaving governments and populations alike in an unprecedented state of uncertainty. We hypothesize these high-level impacts on society are evidenced by shifts in person-level time use trends. It is of critical importance to recognize the heterogeneity of these impacts across different populations. For example, in a survey about mental health during the pandemic, Black participants were 16% more likely to screen positive for depression and Hispanic participants were 23% more likely to screen positive for depression and anxiety (Sharma, 2022). Moreover, we see disparities within occupation type, with healthcare workers (HCW) and emergency responders (ER) indicating a lack of support, an increase in occupational demands, and negative emotional impacts of work duties during the pandemic compared to non-HCW and non-ER occupations (Hendrickson et al., 2021). 

Our investigation makes use of data from the American Time Use Survey, an annual survey sponsored by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics and conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau to measure how Americans divide their time among life activities. Individuals are randomly selected from a subset of households that completed the eighth month of interviews from the Current Population Survey and are interviewed via telephone calls, in which they are asked to detail how they spent their time, where they were, and whom they were with beginning at 4:00 AM the previous day until 4:00 AM the day of the interview. Our analysis uses ATUS data from 2019 (N = 9,435), 2020 (N = 8,782), and 2021 (N = 9,087). There was a brief lapse in data collection from March 18, 2020 to May 9, 2020 as to protect the safety of the ATUS staff. We assume the observations collected in the beginning of March and at the end of May to be representative of the entire month, and therefore use the values available to represent data from March and May respectively. The ATUS defines activities on which Americans spend their time with two distinct category nomenclatures, one with 17 broad activity categories and one with 85 more specific activity categories. Our analysis utilizes demographic information and counts of time spent in the former activity nomenclature from observations recorded in a total of 35 months spanning from 2019 to 2021. To account for non-uniformity in the sampling of demographic groups and days of the week, the ATUS calculates weights for each respondent. The weight of each observation is equal to the number of person-days the respondent represents, such that the weights for weekdays and weekend days sum to the total number of person-days on weekdays and weekend days for specific subpopulations as well as for the overall population. Data collected in 2019 and 2021 utilize the weighting scheme developed in 2006, while data collected in 2020 utilizes weights calculated by a new weighting scheme that better represents the abnormalities of that year. All average values conducted within our analysis are weighted by these provided weights. 

Data cleaning, aggregation, and modeling was performed in R Studio version 2022.07.2. Data visualization was conducted in Python 3.6, namely via the Altair package version 3.0. 

To elucidate broad time use trends over 3 years of data we use t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding with a perplexity value of 10 to reduce the 17 activity dimensions and single time dimension within each month of data collection to 2 dimensions that represent similarity among months. The choice to use tSNE, as opposed to other common dimensionality reduction techniques, is based on tSNE’s ability to maintain the structure of similar and dissimilar points. We prioritize visualizing similarity over finding interpretable clusters of months. To quantify the impact of COVID-19 on how Amerians spend their time, we model the counts of minutes spent on each activity using generalized linear models. Because the variables we are modeling represent counts of minutes spent, we use a log link function. We model each activity’s time use counts, with the exception of the civic duties activity, as this activity has primarily counts of 0, separately. In each of the 16 models, we regress minutes spent on the activity on time period as previously defined, age, sex, race, marital status, education level, occupation group (healthcare worker or not), and weekend day (Saturday or Sunday or not). Time period is our primary explanatory variable of interest, as we are interested in quantifying the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on time spent on each activity. To interpret parameter estimates, we exponentiate each value and find the percent change from the reference group (with the exception of age, in which the percent change is calculated in terms of each one-year increase) by subtracting 1 and multiplying by 100. Negative percent changes correspond to decreases in average time spent compared to the reference group and likewise, positive percent changes correspond to increases in average time spent compared to the reference group, holding all other variables in the model constant. Moreover, to correct for multiple testing, we perform a Bonferroni correction on each parameter estimate’s p-value by dividing our significance level by the number of covariates within each model. Thus, the significance level for each parameter estimate is 𝛼 = 0.05/8 = 0.00625. We identify in which models the time period variables are significant and identify the three variables with the largest effect sizes in each model. We run two additional models for time spet on household activities and caring for the household to look at the interactions between time period and sex and time period and marital statuWe use a two-sample t-test with a correction for unequal variances to determine if differences in the average time spent on each activity in 2019 and 2021 are significant. We use a significance level of 𝛼 = 0.05 for these calculations.

